---
layout: post
title: On receiving advice
---

It's hard to evaluate the advice you receive about making a decision without
any *a priori* experience with the choices. How do you even begin to process
the information you have been given? 

I remember the conversation with my undergrad math advisor, Joe. I had come in
during his office hours to discuss my grad school plans. After two summers of
research and many courses in between, it was clear that I wanted to study
applied math. I had come to talk about programs as well as the application
proces.

I sat down and explained what I wanted to do. I didn't really come to hear his
perspective on my choice, since I was just expecting his blessing. Joe had
always been supportive of my course selections and my summer plans. He had a
sense for the work that got me excited, and he certainly knew what sort of
topics, material, and approaches drove me nuts. Joe had always exceeded my
expectations of him as an advisor, supporting me in many different situations.
He had even helped to secure a position in the department's summer research
program after my major plans had collapsed at the last moment <!--{% sidenote s1 I
might write a post about this story itself. %}-->. That affair in particular has
served as a reminder of the reasons why I am grateful for Joe's advice and
support.

But today the support came in a different form entirely. After I shared my
plans and ideas for the future, Joe paused for a moment. Then, he looked at me
quite directly and said, "You have to be careful with applied math. It
frequently isn't what you think, and I'm not sure if you will like it." 

I was taken aback. He continued: "When people say they do 'applied math,' it
can mean a whole array of different things. Some people spend a whole career
studying one type of PDE and call it 'applied math.' Others write code all day
for a living. That can be 'applied math,' too." He then asked me what I wanted
to do *inside* applied math.

My goal, I explained to him, was to find a way to balance my interest in
"mathematics," (i.e., abstraction, deduction, proof) with my interest in
"computation," (i.e., algorithms, programming, applications). Noting the work
by the resident applied mathematician in the department, I said that I wanted
to find a way to be a "mathematician" in an applied setting, much like that
professor had managed to be.

Joe said that was a laudable goal. But he repeated his warning to me that I be
careful in how I proceed.

I applied to about twenty programs and was accepted by eight. My first formal
acceptance was at Stony Brook, but it was soon followed by others. I spoke to
faculty on the phone, had Skype interviews, and visited a few of the schools in
person. All the while, my relief in simply *being* accepted in the first place
was still present in my mind. At campus visits, I learned about active areas of
research that faculty pursued. Yes, many professors seemd to be studying PDEs
all day, and there was a lot of software development work at the schools I
visited, but nothing seemed outside of my interest.

When I Skyped with the Stony Brook professors, they asked me where I should
like to be placed as a PhD student. The department of applied
mathematics and statistics (AMS) is divided into five primary research areas:
computational applied mathematics, operations research, statistics,
quantitative finance, and mathematical biology. After prefacing that I did
*not* have a firm sense of the problems I wanted to study, I suggested that I
was interested in topics in numerical analysis and possibly optimization. The
professors (one of whom seeming annoyed that I didn't have a research area in
mind already) recommended that I join the computational applied mathematics
area. It was a fairly general area with faculty studying a wide range of
problems, they said. I had no objections, so I agreed.

I eventually accepted the offer from Stony Brook. Late into the semester, I
started carefully examining the programs and courses the AMS department
provided, and it set off one major red flag: they lacked analysis courses. The
two schools I had visited in person both maintained the expectation of a
rigorous background in mathematical analysis from its PhD students, but the AMS
department at Stony Brook did not.

Worried, I went and talked to the applied mathematician in the department. He
gave me some pearls of sage advice:

* It is hard to learn meaningful information about a collection of courses from
  a department-maintained web page.
* If I desperately need to study analysis, there will certainly be courses
  available to do so.
* I am not bound, as a mathematician and researcher, to continue in the
  topics and areas of research that form my doctoral thesis.

I have thought about this advice a few times a week since starting my grad
program.

## Advice is difficult to process but worth recording and revisiting

Both of my professors were correct, of course. I am indebted to their
willingness to take my concerns and provide honest guidance. Even when I didn't
understand what the guidance meant at the time. I'm sure I don't understand it
fully now, either.

It became clear that the computational applied mathematics research area was a
poor fit for me. Many students obtain PhDs for work comprised of almost
entirely software engineering. Very few topics we have studied so far in the
area's courses have much in the way of rigor, abstraction, and proof. I feel as
if this semester has possibly detrimented my abilities (and frankly, my
confindence) as a potential mathematician.

I certainly don't begrudge others for studying in this area. What does and
doesn't work for me need not be prescribed for everyone else. But I did have
some rough weeks this semester, where I spent most of my time worrying that I
had made an irreparable mistake in embarking on applied math. I considered
transferring to the mathematics department, or even dropping out and reapplying
to pure math programs.

It turns out, however, that as much as computational applied math isn't for me,
there are other places in the department that work much closer to my interests
and values. I've moved to operations research, and I am much happier with the
faculty. I am very excited for next semester's courses. I am in a somewhat
tricky place regarding the first qualifying exam, since I will be taking a test
on material I missed this semester, but it is a surmountable obstacle. I
frankly enjoy reviewing the new material far more than I've enjoyed any of the
course work from this semester.

Joe's warning became relevant far faster than I had anticipated, but I was
grateful to have heard it. It helped me process the situation that I found
myself in and give me a sense of context when I was fighting a deep bout of
tunnel vision.

That's kind of the point, though. Good advice comes from experience, providing
clarity when the recipient is entirely uncertain. I could
rely on Joe's perspective when mine was sufficiently blocked from seeing the
big picture. I could think about the long run, the difference between real and
petty concerns, because someone had given me permission to, and I knew it would
be okay. Sometimes that's a huge victory.



